The cat (Felis catus), commonly referred to as the domestic cat or house cat, is a small domesticated carnivorous
mammal. It is the only domesticed species in the family Felidae. Recent advances in archaeology and genetics have shown
that the domestication of the cat occurred in the Near East around 7500 BC. It is commonly kept as a house pet and farm
cat, but also ranges freely as a feral cat avoiding human contact. It is valued by humans for companionship and its
ability to kill vermin. Its retractable claws are adapted to killing small prey like mice and rats. It has a strong,
flexible body, quick reflexes, sharp teeth, and its night vision and sense of smell are well developed. It is a social
species, but a solitary hunter and a crepuscular predator. Cat communication includes vocalizations like meowing,
purring, trilling, hissing, growling, and grunting as well as cat body language. It can hear sounds too faint or too
high in frequency for human ears, such as those made by small mammals. It also secretes and perceives pheromones.

Female domestic cats can have kittens from spring to late autumn in temperate zones and throughout the year in
equatorial regions, with litter sizes often ranging from two to five kittens. Domestic cats are bred and shown at
events as registered pedigreed cats, a hobby known as cat fancy. Animal population control of cats may be achieved by
spaying and neutering, but their proliferation and the abandonment of pets has resulted in large numbers of feral cats
worldwide, contributing to the extinction of bird, mammal and reptile species.

As of 2017, the domestic cat was the second most popular pet in the United States, with 95.6 million cats owned and
around 42 million households owning at least one cat. In the United Kingdom, 26% of adults have a cat, with an
estimated population of 10.9 million pet cats as of 2020. As of 2021, there were an estimated 220 million owned and
480 million stray cats in the world.

The origin of the English word cat, Old English catt, is thought to be the Late Latin word cattus, which was first used
at the beginning of the 6th century.[4] The Late Latin word may be derived from an unidentified African language.[5]
The Nubian word kaddîska 'wildcat' and Nobiin kadīs are possible sources or cognates.[6]

The forms might also have derived from an ancient Germanic word that was absorbed into Latin and then into Greek,
Syriac, and Arabic.[7] The word may be derived from Germanic and Northern European languages, and ultimately be
borrowed from Uralic, cf. Northern Sámi gáđfi, 'female stoat', and Hungarian hölgy, 'lady, female stoat';
from Proto-Uralic *käďwä, 'female (of a furred animal)'.[8]

The English puss, extended as pussy and pussycat, is attested from the 16th century and may have been introduced from
Dutch poes or from Low German puuskatte, related to Swedish kattepus, or Norwegian pus, pusekatt. Similar forms exist
in Lithuanian puižė and Irish puisín or puiscín. The etymology of this word is unknown, but it may have arisen from a
sound used to attract a cat.[9][10]

A male cat is called a tom or tomcat[11] (or a gib,[12] if neutered). A female is called a queen[13][14]
(or sometimes a molly,[15] if spayed). A juvenile cat is referred to as a kitten. In Early Modern English, the word
kitten was interchangeable with the now-obsolete word catling.[16] A group of cats can be referred to as a clowder or a
glaring.

The scientific name Felis catus was proposed by Carl Linnaeus in 1758 for a domestic cat.[1][2] Felis catus domesticus
was proposed by Johann Christian Polycarp Erxleben in 1777.[3] Felis daemon proposed by Konstantin Satunin in 1904 was
a black cat from the Transcaucasus, later identified as a domestic cat.[18][19]

In 2003, the International Commission on Zoological Nomenclature ruled that the domestic cat is a distinct species,
namely Felis catus.[20][21] In 2007, the modern domesticated subspecies F. silvestris catus sampled worldwide was
considered to have likely descended from the Near Eastern wildcat (F. lybica), following results of phylogenetic
research.[22][23][a] In 2017, the IUCN Cat Classification Taskforce followed the recommendation of the ICZN in
regarding the domestic cat as a distinct species, Felis catus.[24]
